Thomas Hardy is one of the four acid properties that defines a relational database management system.
And I always say relational, but really it defines any database system, whether it's a sequel, graph
time based, really anything that Thomas said is a very critical concept to understand.
How about we jump into this lecture and discuss this beautiful concept?
So talk about Atomic City, really, all the queries in a transaction must succeed.
That is the definition offered Atomic City.
We talked about what a transaction is really in that transaction lecture.
And we said that all the ways in a given transaction is considered to be one unit of work, and that
kind of defines what, what, what automaticity really is, right?
It's like an atom.
And until now, an atom cannot be split.
I know there is a nuclear fission that kind of contradicts that, but this thing was defined in 1970,
and I don't believe they discovered fission back then.
I might be wrong, but that's where atomistic comes in the door.
You treat this as an atom that cannot be split.
All the queries in a transaction must succeed.
If one query fail, what happens if one query fail for any reason, a failed constraint like the balance
goes to minus one minus negative or a a duplicate primary key entry, right, or an actual invalid equals
index.
That is a failed query and what happens when you have one single, even if you had 100 successful queries
in the same transaction, that one failure should roll back the transaction immediately because I said
things went wrong.
That's the rule of eternity.
So what happened if the database goes down during my transaction, I can't really roll back because
the database goes down.
What have in this case, if the database went down prior to a commit, you didn't really commit the
transaction.
All the successful queries in the transsexual should be rolled back.
Right?
Even if you had 100 successful queries in this transaction and you didn't really fail, you didn't fail.
But the database just crashed.
All right.
So the next query didn't really fail.
So the database will restart.
So once the database sort of starts, that's when the database should detect that, hey, there was
a failure technically right, because microarrays didn't fail.
But the database went down and I was made transaction and I didn't commit these changes made by the
transaction.
If the database is actually making, changes should be rolled back.
That's why I always wanted to think about this as you read this, as I as I took, what is the database
doing in a transaction?
Is it actually writing to disk, right?
I'm not going to.
If what if I don't?
I don't comment.
Do we go back to disk and remove these changes?
All of this thing really is what makes or breaks a database.
And this goes back to most of the questions I receive really is what database should I choose?
What really you need to understand how these databases work and based on your use case, make a choice.
There are databases that Kim before commits any right you make right and in the in the queries and the
transaction they are actually writing to disk so they they assume you're going to commit.
So they are optimistic in that nature.
So when you actually in fact commit, I don't need to do any work because I committed.
I actually wrote everything to disk.
It will just write one one bit that says this transaction is committed and is so fast, right?
Other databases doesn't don't write anything.
So the queries are so fast executing because they are always right to memory.
But the ones you want to commit, they have to go take everything that is a memory and then flushes
to disk.
And that comet will be slow in that regard.
But the roll back will be as absolutely fast.
You know, it all depends.
There is no right or wrong, there is always a tradeoff.
Take an example.
This is an example I talk and I talk about in my Trump transaction lecture at almost 30, so I have
the same table accountable balance thousand five hundred account I.D. one to.
We want to send money from $100 from account one to account two.
What do we do?
Very simple.
We need to debit this account and created this account.
So minus 100 this plus 100 this, and we have to do it in a transaction because these two should happen
at the same time.
Right?
So we start a transaction.
We select the banners to check if this guy even have money.
And they do because the bonus is greater than 100 because it's a thousand right because that's the account
one.
So yeah, let's go ahead and update the account.
Let's deduct 100 and whatever
database crashed, I did one change.
And the second change I wanted to do, but the device crashed.
We restarted the database, and let's assume this is a bad, badly implemented database system.
This is what we see when we restore the system.
We see 900 here.
What what?
What happened, so in this case, we just lost $100 in thin air, right?
That's a really bad that's really bad, inconsistent.
This is an inconsistent view.
Not only you just lost actual money that you you have no idea where we're gone because of technology
effectively, right?
So after we restarted the machine, the first account has been debated by the other account has not
been accredited.
Very bad, inconsistent view.
So lack of atomistic leads to inconsistencies and we're going to talk about consistencies and it's on
larger.
This is really about.
We just lost data.
The information is inconsistent.
We talked about that an atomic transaction is a transaction that will roll back all the queries if one
or more Kiwis fail.
Well, in this situation, yeah, there was a failure, but it's not really our fault because my other
transaction.
My other query, sorry, didn't even execute.
So the database got to a star.
So how do I know to roll back?
I don't know.
The database didn't even give it a chance to roll back.
I can issue the command roll back so the database now is responsible to clean up this garbage.
It was OK.
There was ah, in a running transaction, and he has to know that there is a transaction that has been
running and it was crashed, right?
So upon restart, we need to clean up.
Right.
And let me let me tell you from my professional experience, right?
I started working professionally back in 2005, and I've seen roll back that takes an hour over an hour,
actually for long transactions, especially in SQL Server.
But I've seen rollbacks, not actual rollback commit by the user.
No, actually, the databases weighed.
I can even start the database before I roll back this this stuff because it has to go and clean up all
the garbage that has been written.
This half garbage that has been written right.
And this is the garbage has been written here.
We wrote that debates one account minus one.
We need to change the 900 back to a thousand to get a consistent view.
And that's where it all play.
Some databases are won't let you stored the database before it's rolled back.
They they've in recent batches in recent releases now say, OK, it's not really that bad.
Let them roll, roared back and let them continue working on other tables.
Other databases by this database now is just it's in a all back state.
So CPU is getting hammered, right?
Memory is getting hammered.
All these things really as a result.
The database should clean this up after it's all we talked about this and we talked about how long this
could take.
Right?
And it really depends on how much you wrote and how long was the transaction.
Longan transactions is generally a bad idea because of these things.
Let's do a quick summary on that to most of the city is the idea of the transaction being one unit of
work and that cannot be split.
That's the property of an atom police, at least back in 1970.
If they figure fission nuclear fission, then this, this this.
This is broken effectively.
But do you get the idea right?
So you cannot really.
An atom should be one unit and cannot be split, right?
So if if you have a transaction with 100 queries, all these hundred ways should succeed.
If any of these 100 query fail, all the 100 or anything that is successful in the query should be rolled
back.
And not only that, but you should even in the case of a crash in the database.
So that's not an actual explicit failure by the user.
That should also roll back the changes.
That was that tomasetti letter.
I'm going to see you in the next lecture.
Stay tuned.